docs: 7.0 beta what's new draft (#24066)
grafana/grafana: docs/sources/guides/whats-new-in-v7-0.md

## New tracing UI

With Grafana 7.0 we are adding major support for distributed tracing. This adds an important telemetry mode to complement the existing support for metrics and logs. Traces allow you to follow how single requests travelled through a distributed system. We are starting with an integrated trace viewer and two new built-in data sources: Jaeger and Zipkin.

You can use the new trace view in Explore either directly and search for a particular trace or you can configure Loki to detect trace IDs in the log lines and link directly to a trace timeline pulled from Jaeger or Zipkin data source.

In the future we will add more workflows and integrations so that correlating between metrics, logs and traces is even easier.

## Transformations

> With Grafana 7.0, data transformations are now a core part of the data processing that happens before the visualization step. All users can now do simple transformations no matter what data source or visualization type they use.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With Grafana 7.0, data transformations are now a core part of the data processing that happens before the visualization step. All users can now do simple transformations no matter what data source or visualization type they use.
```
Not just visualizing data from anywhere, in Grafana 7 you can transform it too. By chaining a simple set of point and click transformations users will be able join, pivot, filter, re-name and calculate to get the results they need. Perfect for operations across queries or data sources missing essential data transformations.

> With Grafana 7.0, data transformations are now a core part of the data processing that happens before the visualization step. All users can now do simple transformations no matter what data source or visualization type they use.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Not just visualizing data from anywhere, in Grafana 7 you can transform it too. By chaining a simple set of point and click transformations users will be able join, pivot, filter, re-name and calculate to get the results they need. Perfect for operations across queries or data sources missing essential data transformations.
```

Up until now the overrides were available only for Graph and Table panel(via Column Styles), but with 7.0 they work consistently across all visualisation types and plugins.

This feature enables even more powerful visualizations and fine grained control over how the data is displayed.

## Panel inspect and export to CSV

Another new feature of Grafana 7.0 is Panel inspect. Inspect allows you to view the raw data for any Grafana panel as well as export that data to a CSV file. With Panel inspect you will also be able to perform simple raw data transformations like join, view query stats or detailed execution data.

{{< docs-imagebox img="/img/docs/v70/panel_edit_export_raw_data.png" max-width="1024px" caption="Panel Edit - Export raw data to CSV" >}}
{{< docs-imagebox img="/img/docs/v70/panel_edit_query_inspector.png" max-width="1024px" caption="Panel Edit - Query Inspector" >}}
{{< docs-imagebox img="/img/docs/v70/panel_edit_raw_json.png" max-width="1024px" caption="Panel Edit - View raw JSON" >}}

> {{< docs-imagebox img="/img/docs/v70/panel_edit_stats.png" max-width="1024px" caption="Panel Edit - Stats" >}}

Reviewer: A bit too many full size screenshots, with browser tabs :) Makes the article hard to read (A a lot of scrolling required). We can replace these images with the inspect video I have recorded, but not uploaded to youtube yet (scheduled for next Monday).

Author: Removed most of these images for now.

Read more about [Image Rendering]({{< relref "../administration/image_rendering/" >}}) in the documentation for further instructions.

## Rich History in Explore out of beta

## Stackdriver data source supports Service Monitoring

[Service monitoring](https://cloud.google.com/service-monitoring) in Google Cloud Platform (GCP) enables you to monitor based on Service Level Objectives (SLOs) for your GCP services. The new SLO query builder in the Stackdriver data source allows you to display SLO data in Grafana.

https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/latest/features/datasources/stackdriver/#slo-service-level-objective-queries

## Time zone support

### Grafana Enterprise

Grafana Enterprise focuses on solving problems for large companies and Grafana installations. And in Grafana 7.0 we are finally
solving one of the most common problems of using Grafana at scale.

That is problems like:

- There are too many dashboards, how do I find the right one?
- How to find popular dashboards
- How to indentify dashboards that are not being used

> - Who created or last viewed this dashboard?

Reviewer: this part was written super quick to get something before my sick daughter woke up :) needs further revisions :)

Reviewer 2: We will take a stab at it

> That is problems like:
> 
> - There are too many dashboards, how do I find the right one?
> - How to find popular dashboards
> - How to indentify dashboards that are not being used
> - Who created or last viewed this dashboard?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
That is problems like:

- There are too many dashboards, how do I find the right one?
- How to find popular dashboards
- How to find dashboards with errors
- How to identify dashboards that are not being used
- Who created or last viewed this dashboard?
```

## Usage Analytics and Presence

> In Grafana 7.0 we are introducing a series of features that build on our new usage analytics engine. Features like improved dashboard search to sort dashboards by usage. When a user opens a dashboard, they will see a presence indicator of who else is viewing the same dashboard. And finally open a dashboard usage stats drawer to view recent dashboard usage.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In Grafana 7.0 we are introducing a series of features that build on our new usage analytics engine. Features like improved dashboard search to sort dashboards by usage and errors. When a user opens a dashboard, they will see a presence indicator of who else is viewing the same dashboard. And finally open a dashboard usage stats drawer to view recent dashboard usage.
```

{{< docs-imagebox img="/img/docs/v70/presence_indicator.jpg" max-width="1024px" caption="Grafana Enterprise - Presence Indicator" >}}
{{< docs-imagebox img="/img/docs/v70/dashboard_insights_stats.png" max-width="1024px" caption="Dashboard Insights Stats" >}}
{{< docs-imagebox img="/img/docs/v70/dashboard_insights_users.png" max-width="1024px" caption="Dashboard Insights Users" >}}
{{< docs-imagebox img="/img/docs/v70/improved_search.png" max-width="1024px" caption="Search" >}}

> 

Reviewer: Pushed this down and added an Enterprise top section, as there was nothing that mentioned Usage Analytics and Presence as being enterprise features. 

this needs more work and the screenshots are too many and too big and for some reason has a strange margin and border

Reviewer: These images are also too big and too many. Either make pick 2 or make them smaller only highlighting the thing we want to show. But probably best to eplace these images with a video also (at some point).

Author: I just added all the images so that @jongyllen can pick which ones he wants. The screenshots where you can see the MacOS chrome need to be edited.

# What's new in Grafana v7.0

This topic includes the release notes for the Grafana v7.0, which is currently in beta. For all details, read the full [CHANGELOG.md](https://github.com/grafana/grafana/blob/master/CHANGELOG.md).

This major release of Grafana contains a lot of new features and enhancements including the next step in our Observability story, powerful new features for manipulating, transforming and doing math on data and the first version of Usage Analytics in Grafana Enterprise.

The Grafana 7.0 stable will be released on the 18th of May. In the meantime if your want to know more about what we have been up to and what is coming sign up to our online GrafanaCon conference.

[{{< figure src="/assets/img/blog/GrafanaCONline.jpg" max-width="800px" lightbox="false" caption="GrafanaCONline May 13-29" >}}](https://grafana.com/about/events/grafanacon/2020/?source=blog)

The main highlights are:

> 

Reviewer 3: Are we going to link these?

- **New Panel Editor:** Redesign based on community feedback
- **Explore:** New tracing UI and support for visualizing Jaeger and Zipkin traces.
- **Enterprise:** Usage Analytics and Presence
- **Transformations:** Transformations and simple Math operations for all data sources.
- **Field overrides:** Automatically configure panels with data from queries.
- **Table:** New Table panel.
- **Plugins:** New plugins platform
- **Tutorials:** New tutorials section
- **Cloudwatch:** Cloudwatch Logs
- **Breaking change:** PhantomJS removed

> ## New Panel Editor

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## New panel editor
```

> In Grafana 7 we have redesigned the UI for editing panels. The first visible change is that we have separated panel display settings to a right hand side pane that you can collapse or expand depending on what your focus is on. With this change we are also introducing our new unified option model & UI for defining data configuration and display options. This unified data configuration system powers a consistent UI for setting data options across visualizations as well as making all data display settings data driven and overridable.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In Grafana 7.0 we have redesigned the UI for editing panels. The first visible change is that we have separated panel display settings to a right-hand side pane that you can collapse or expand depending on what your focus is on. With this change we are also introducing our new unified option model and UI for defining data configuration and display options. This unified data configuration system powers a consistent UI for setting data options across visualizations and making all data display settings data driven and overridable.
```

## New tracing UI

With Grafana 7.0 we are adding major support for distributed tracing. This adds an important telemetry mode to complement the existing support for metrics and logs. Traces allow you to follow how single requests travelled through a distributed system. We are starting with an integrated trace viewer and two new built-in data sources: Jaeger and Zipkin.

You can use the new trace view in Explore either directly and search for a particular trace or you can configure Loki to detect trace IDs in the log lines and link directly to a trace timeline pulled from Jaeger or Zipkin data source.

In the future we will add more workflows and integrations so that correlating between metrics, logs and traces is even easier.

## Transformations

> Not just visualizing data from anywhere, in Grafana 7 you can transform it too. By chaining a simple set of point and click transformations users will be able join, pivot, filter, re-name and calculate to get the results they need. Perfect for operations across queries or data sources missing essential data transformations.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Not just visualizing data from anywhere, in Grafana 7.0 you can transform them, too. By chaining a simple set of point and click transformations users will be able join, pivot, filter, re-name and calculate to get the results they need. Perfect for operations across queries or data sources missing essential data transformations.
```

**Transformations shipping in 7.0**

- **Reduce:** Reduce many rows / data points to a single value
- **Filter by name:** Filter fields by name or regex
- **Filter by refId:** Filter by query letter
- **Organize fields:** Reorder, rename and hide fields.
- **Labels to fields:** Transform time series with labels into a table where labels get's converted to fields and the result is joined by time
- **Join by field:** Join many result sets (series) together using for example the time field. Useful for transforming time series into a table with a shared time column and where each series get it's own column.
- **Add field from calculation:** This is a powerful transformation that allows you perform many different types of math operations and add the result as a new field. Examples:
  - Calculate the difference between two series or fields and add the result to a new field
  - Multiply one field with another another and add the result to a new field

> ## Field overrides

Reviewer 3: @dprokop, when we get the simple task descriptions sorted out, we should add them for transformations and field overrides. I think it will help our users understand why they should care.

{{< docs-imagebox img="/img/docs/v70/panel_edit_stats.png" max-width="1024px" caption="Panel Edit - Stats" >}}

## Table panel

Grafana 7.0 comes with a new table panel (and deprecates the old one). This new table panel supports horizontal scrolling and column resize. Paired with the new `Organize fields` transformation detailed above you can reorder, hide & rename columns. This new panel also supports new cell display modes, like showing a bar gauge inside a cell.

{{< youtube J29wILRh3QQ >}}

## Auto grid mode for Stat panel and Gauge

This new 7.0 feature is for the gauge and stat panels. Before, stat and gauge only supported horizontal or vertical stacking: The auto layout mode just selected vertical or horizontal stacking based on the panel dimensions (whatever was highest). But in 7.0 the auto layout for these two panels will allow dynamic grid layouts where Grafana will try to optimize the usage of space and lay out each sub-visualization in a grid.

{{< youtube noq1rLGvsrU >}}

## Cloudwatch Logs

Grafana 7.0 adds logging support to one of our most popular cloud provider data sources. Autocomplete support for Cloudwatch Logs queries is included for improved productivity.

> ## Plugin platform

Reviewer 3: We need an intro here, at least one sentence.

### Support for backend component - can add alerting to external plugins

> 

Reviewer 3: We seem to be missing content here.

Read more about [Image Rendering]({{< relref "../administration/image_rendering/" >}}) in the documentation for further instructions.

## Rich History in Explore out of beta

## Stackdriver data source supports Service Monitoring

[Service monitoring](https://cloud.google.com/service-monitoring) in Google Cloud Platform (GCP) enables you to monitor based on Service Level Objectives (SLOs) for your GCP services. The new SLO query builder in the Stackdriver data source allows you to display SLO data in Grafana.

https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/latest/features/datasources/stackdriver/#slo-service-level-objective-queries

## Time zone support

### Grafana Enterprise

Grafana Enterprise focuses on solving problems for large companies and Grafana installations. And in Grafana 7.0 we are finally
solving one of the most common problems of using Grafana at scale.

> That is problems like:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This includes problems like:
```

> - There are too many dashboards, how do I find the right one?

Reviewer 3: @dprokop , this is exactly the sort of thing we need elsewhere!

- How to find popular dashboards
- How to find dashboards with errors
- How to identify dashboards that are not being used
- Who created or last viewed this dashboard?

> ## Usage Analytics and Presence

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Usage analytics and presence
```

In Grafana 7.0 we are introducing a series of features that build on our new usage analytics engine. Features like improved dashboard search to sort dashboards by usage and errors. When a user opens a dashboard, they will see a presence indicator of who else is viewing the same dashboard. And finally open a dashboard usage stats drawer to view recent dashboard usage.

{{< docs-imagebox img="/img/docs/v70/presence_indicator.jpg" max-width="1024px" caption="Grafana Enterprise - Presence Indicator" >}}
{{< docs-imagebox img="/img/docs/v70/dashboard_insights_stats.png" max-width="1024px" caption="Dashboard Insights Stats" >}}
{{< docs-imagebox img="/img/docs/v70/dashboard_insights_users.png" max-width="1024px" caption="Dashboard Insights Users" >}}
{{< docs-imagebox img="/img/docs/v70/improved_search.png" max-width="1024px" caption="Search" >}}

## Upgrading

See [upgrade notes]({{< relref "../installation/upgrading/#upgrading-to-v7-0" >}}).

> ## Changelog

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Change log
```

Author: I don't agree with this: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Changelog `changelog` is the established term.

Reviewer 3: Okeydokey

# What's new in Grafana v7.0

This topic includes the release notes for the Grafana v7.0, which is currently in beta. For all details, read the full [CHANGELOG.md](https://github.com/grafana/grafana/blob/master/CHANGELOG.md).

> This major release of Grafana contains a lot of new features and enhancements including the next step in our Observability story, powerful new features for manipulating, transforming and doing math on data and the first version of Usage Analytics in Grafana Enterprise.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This major release of Grafana is the next step in our Observability story. It includes powerful new features for manipulating, transforming, and doing math on data. Grafana Enterprise has the first version of Usage analytics, which will help Grafana Admins better manage large, corporate Grafana ecosystems.
```

> The Grafana 7.0 stable will be released on the 18th of May. In the meantime if your want to know more about what we have been up to and what is coming sign up to our online GrafanaCon conference.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The Grafana 7.0 stable release is scheduled for the 18th of May. In the meantime, if you want to know more about what we've been up to and what is coming, sign up for our online GrafanaCon conference.
```

The main highlights are:

- [**New Panel Editor** Redesign based on community feedback.]({{< relref "#new-panel-editor" >}})
- [**Explore:** New tracing UI and support for visualizing Jaeger and Zipkin traces.]({{< relref "#new-tracing-ui" >}})
- [**Enterprise** Usage Analytics and Presence.]({{< relref "#grafana-enterprise" >}})
- [**Transformations** Transformations and simple Math operations for all data sources.]({{< relref "#transformations" >}})
- [**Field overrides** Automatically configure panels with data from queries.]({{< relref "#field-overrides" >}})
- [**Table** New Table panel.]({{< relref "#table-panel" >}})
- [**Plugins** New plugins platform.]({{< relref "#plugins-platform" >}})
- [**Tutorials** New tutorials section.]({{< relref "#new-tutorials" >}})
- [**Cloudwatch** Support for Cloudwatch Logs in Explore and the Logs panel.]({{< relref "#cloudwatch-logs" >}})
- [**Breaking change** PhantomJS removed.]({{< relref "#breaking-change-phantomjs-removed" >}})
- [**Time zones** Time zone support]({{< relref "#time-zone-support" >}})

## New panel editor

> In Grafana 7.0 we have redesigned the UI for editing panels. The first visible change is that we have separated panel display settings to a right-hand side pane that you can collapse or expand depending on what your focus is on. With this change we are also introducing our new unified option model and UI for defining data configuration and display options. This unified data configuration system powers a consistent UI for setting data options across visualizations and making all data display settings data driven and overridable.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We redesigned the UI for editing panels. We separated panel display settings to a right-hand side pane that you can collapse or expand depending on what your focus is on. With this change we are also introducing our new unified option model and UI for defining data configuration and display options. This unified data configuration system powers a consistent UI for setting data options across visualizations and making all data display settings data-driven and overridable.
```

## New tracing UI

> With Grafana 7.0 we are adding major support for distributed tracing. This adds an important telemetry mode to complement the existing support for metrics and logs. Traces allow you to follow how single requests travelled through a distributed system. We are starting with an integrated trace viewer and two new built-in data sources: Jaeger and Zipkin.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This release adds major support for distributed tracing, including a telemetry mode to complement the existing support for metrics and logs. Traces allow you to follow how single requests travel through a distributed system. We are starting with an integrated trace viewer and two new built-in data sources: Jaeger and Zipkin.
```

> You can use the new trace view in Explore either directly and search for a particular trace or you can configure Loki to detect trace IDs in the log lines and link directly to a trace timeline pulled from Jaeger or Zipkin data source.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You can use the new trace view in Explore either directly tosearch for a particular trace, or you can configure Loki to detect trace IDs in the log lines and link directly to a trace timeline pulled from Jaeger or Zipkin data source.
```

Author: Missing a space here - will fix it manually.

> In the future we will add more workflows and integrations so that correlating between metrics, logs and traces is even easier.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In the future we will add more workflows and integrations so that correlating between metrics, logs, and traces is even easier.
```

{{< docs-imagebox img="/img/docs/v70/tracing_ui.png" max-width="1024px" caption="Tracing UI" >}}

## Transformations

> Not just visualizing data from anywhere, in Grafana 7.0 you can transform them, too. By chaining a simple set of point and click transformations users will be able join, pivot, filter, re-name and calculate to get the results they need. Perfect for operations across queries or data sources missing essential data transformations.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Not just visualizing data from anywhere, in Grafana 7.0 you can transform them, too. By chaining a simple set of point and click transformations, you can users join, pivot, filter, re-name, and calculate to get the results you need. It is perfect for operations across queries or data sources missing essential data transformations.
```

> Transformations and maths across queries. The data you want to visualize can come from many different places and it is usually not in exactly the right form. The new transformations feature allows you to rename fields, join separate time series together and more - data munging. Usually this requires writing code but this new feature lets you do it in the Grafana UI instead. It also lets you do maths across queries. Lots of data sources do not support this natively so being able to do it in Grafana is a killer feature. For users, with large dashboards or with heavy queries, being able to reuse the query result from one panel in another panel can be a huge performance gain.

Reviewer 3: This looks like someone's notes that did not get deleted. The paragraph is almost incoherent.

The [Google Sheets data source](https://grafana.com/grafana/plugins/grafana-googlesheets-datasource) that was published a few weeks ago works really well together with the transformations feature.

> **Transformations shipping in 7.0**

Reviewer 3: Okay for now, but we should delete this section once the docs are added. Release notes exist to tell you what changed and to link to the docs with the actual documentation. This saves us a ton on updating and maintenance.

- **Reduce:** Reduce many rows / data points to a single value
- **Filter by name:** Filter fields by name or regex
- **Filter by refId:** Filter by query letter
- **Organize fields:** Reorder, rename and hide fields.
- **Labels to fields:** Transform time series with labels into a table where labels get converted to fields and the result is joined by time
- **Join by field:** Join many result sets (series) together using for example the time field. Useful for transforming time series into a table with a shared time column and where each series get it's own column.
- **Add field from calculation:** This is a powerful transformation that allows you perform many different types of math operations and add the result as a new field. Examples:
  - Calculate the difference between two series or fields and add the result to a new field
  - Multiply one field with another another and add the result to a new field

## Field overrides

> With Grafana 7.0 we are introducing a new, unified data configuration system that powers a consistent UI for setting data options across visualizations as well as making all data display settings data driven and overridable. This new option architecture and UI will make all panels have a consistent set of options and behaviors for attributes like `unit`, `min`, `max`, `thresholds`, `links`, `decimals` or `value mappings`. Not only that but all these options will share a consistent UI for specifying override rules and is extensible for custom panel specific options.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This new option architecture and UI makes all panels have a consistent set of options and behaviors for attributes like `unit`, `min`, `max`, `thresholds`, `links`, `decimals` or `value mappings`. Not only that, but all these options will share a consistent UI for specifying override rules and is extensible for custom panel specific options.
```

Reviewer 3: This entire paragraph seems to be marketing-speak that has little to nothing to do with explaining Field configurations except for the list of attributes.

Up until now the overrides were available only for Graph and Table panel(via Column Styles), but with 7.0 they work consistently across all visualisation types and plugins.

> This feature enables even more powerful visualizations and fine grained control over how the data is displayed.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This feature enables even more powerful visualizations and fine-grained control over how the data is displayed.
```

## Panel inspect and export to CSV

{{< docs-imagebox img="/img/docs/v70/panel_edit_export_raw_data.png" max-width="800px" class="docs-image--right" caption="Panel Edit - Export raw data to CSV" >}}

> Another new feature of Grafana 7.0 is Panel inspect. Inspect allows you to view the raw data for any Grafana panel as well as export that data to a CSV file. With Panel inspect you will also be able to perform simple raw data transformations like join, view query stats or detailed execution data.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Panel Inspect allows you to view the raw data for any Grafana panel as well as export that data to a CSV file. You can also perform simple raw data transformations like join, view query stats, or detailed execution data.
```

Reviewer 3: Put the text above the image.

<div class="clearfix"></div>

## Table panel

> Grafana 7.0 comes with a new table panel (and deprecates the old one). This new table panel supports horizontal scrolling and column resize. Paired with the new `Organize fields` transformation detailed above you can reorder, hide & rename columns. This new panel also supports new cell display modes, like showing a bar gauge inside a cell.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Grafana 7.0 comes with a new table panel (and deprecates the old one). This new table panel supports horizontal scrolling and column resizing. Paired with the new `Organize fields` transformation detailed above, you can reorder, hide, and rename columns. This new panel also supports new cell display modes, like showing a bar gauge inside a cell.
```

{{< youtube J29wILRh3QQ >}}
<br />

## Auto grid mode for Stat panel and Gauge

> This new 7.0 feature is for the gauge and stat panels. Before, stat and gauge only supported horizontal or vertical stacking: The auto layout mode just selected vertical or horizontal stacking based on the panel dimensions (whatever was highest). But in 7.0 the auto layout for these two panels will allow dynamic grid layouts where Grafana will try to optimize the usage of space and lay out each sub-visualization in a grid.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In previous releases, the stat and gauge panels only supported horizontal or vertical stacking: The auto layout mode just selected vertical or horizontal stacking based on the panel dimensions (whatever was highest). But in 7.0 the auto layout for these two panels allows dynamic grid layouts where Grafana attempts to optimize the usage of space and lay out each sub-visualization in a grid.
```

{{< youtube noq1rLGvsrU >}}
<br />

## Cloudwatch Logs

> Grafana 7.0 adds logging support to one of our most popular cloud provider data sources. Autocomplete support for Cloudwatch Logs queries is included for improved productivity. There is support for deep linking to the CloudWatch Logs Insights console for log queries, similar to the deep linking feature for Cloudwatch metrics. Since CloudWatch Logs queries can return time series data, for example through the use of the `stats` command, alerting is supported too.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We have added logging support to one of our most popular cloud provider data sources. Autocomplete support for Cloudwatch Logs queries is included for improved productivity. There is support for deep linking to the CloudWatch Logs Insights console for log queries, similar to the deep linking feature for Cloudwatch metrics. Since CloudWatch Logs queries can return time series data, for example through the use of the `stats` command, alerting is supported as well.
```

## Plugins platform

> The platform for plugins has been completely re-imagined and provides ready-made components and tooling to help both inexperienced and experienced developers get up and running more quickly. The tooling, documentation and new components will improve plugin quality and reduce long-term maintenance. We are seeing already that a a high quality plugin with the Grafana look and feel can be written in much fewer lines of code than previously.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The platform for plugins has been completely re-imagined and provides ready-made components and tooling to help both inexperienced and experienced developers get up and running more quickly. The tooling, documentation, and new components will improve plugin quality and reduce long-term maintenance. We are seeing already that a high quality plugin with the Grafana look and feel can be written with fewer lines of code than previously.
```

> ### Front end plugins platform

Reviewer 3: Isn't Frontend one word?

Reviewer 3: Or hyphenated at least.

In Grafana 7.0 we are maturing our panel and front-end datasource plugins platform.

Plugins can use the same React components that the Grafana team uses to build Grafana. Using these components means the Grafana team will support and improve them continually and make your plugin as polished as the rest of Grafana’s UI. The new [`@grafana/ui` components library](https://developers.grafana.com/ui) is documented with Storybook (visual documentation) and is available on NPM.

The `@grafana/data`, `@grafana/runtime`, `@grafana/e2e packages` (also available via NPM) aim to simplify the way plugins are developed. We want to deliver a set of [reliable APIs](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/latest/packages_api/) for plugin developers.

With [@grafana/toolkit](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@grafana/toolkit) we are delivering a simple CLI that helps plugin authors quickly scaffold, develop and test their plugins without worrying about configuration details. A plugin author no longer needs to be a grunt or webpack expert to build their plugin.

### Support for backend plugins

> Grafana now officially supports backend plugins and the first type of plugin to be introduced is a backend component for data source plugins. You can optionally add a backend component to your data source plugin and implement the query logic there to automatically enable alerting in Grafana for your plugin. In the 7.0 release, we provide a Go SDK to build plugins and you can generate a plugin scaffold to help you get started using the [`@grafana/toolkit`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@grafana/toolkit).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Grafana now officially supports backend plugins. The first type of plugin to be introduced is a backend component for data source plugins. You can optionally add a backend component to your data source plugin and implement the query logic there to automatically enable alerting in Grafana for your plugin. We provide a Go SDK to build plugins and you can generate a plugin scaffold to help you get started using the [`@grafana/toolkit`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@grafana/toolkit).
```

Plugins can be monitored with the new metrics and health check capabilities. The new Resources capability means backend components can return non-time series data like JSON or static resources like images and opens up Grafana for new use cases.

With this release, we are deprecating the unofficial first version of backend plugins which will be removed in a future release.

> ## New tutorials

Reviewer 3: I suggest putting this before the new plugins platform section.

To help you get started with Grafana, we’ve launched a brand new tutorials platform. We’ll continue to expand the platform with more tutorials, but here are some of the ones you can try out now:

- [Grafana fundamentals](https://grafana.com/tutorials/grafana-fundamentals/)
- [Create users and teams](https://grafana.com/tutorials/create-users-and-teams/)
- [Build a panel plugin](https://grafana.com/tutorials/build-a-panel-plugin/)
- [Build a data source plugin](https://grafana.com/tutorials/build-a-data-source-plugin/)

## Rollup indicator for Metrictank queries

{{< docs-imagebox img="/img/docs/v70/metrictank_rollup_metadata.png" max-width="800px" class="docs-image--right" caption="Metrictank rollup metadata" >}}

> Depending on the cardinality of the data and the time range MetricTank may return rolled up (aggregated) data. This can be as subtle as potentially only 1 or 2 graphs out of nine being rolled up. The new rollup indicator is visible in the panel title and you can also inspect extensive metadata and stats about the Metrictank query result and its rollups.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Depending on the cardinality of the data and the time range MetricTank may return rolled up (aggregated) data. This can be as subtle as potentially only one or two graphs out of nine being rolled up. The new rollup indicator is visible in the panel title and you can also inspect extensive metadata and stats about the Metrictank query result and its rollups.
```

<div class="clearfix"></div>

## Breaking change - PhantomJS removed

> [PhantomJS](https://phantomjs.org/), have been used for rendering images of dashboards and panels and have been included with Grafana since Grafana v2.0. Since then we’ve had a lot of related bugs and security related issues, mainly due to the fact that PhantomJS have struggled with supporting modern web technologies. Throughout the years, maintaining PhantomJS support in Grafana has been a nightmare. Removing support for PhantomJS has been a high priority for the Grafana project and got stressed even more when the PhantomJS maintainer in March 2018 [announced](https://github.com/ariya/phantomjs/issues/15344) the end of the project.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
[PhantomJS](https://phantomjs.org/) was used for rendering images of dashboards and panels and has been included with Grafana since Grafana v2.0. Since then, we’ve had a lot of related bugs and security-related issues, mainly due to the fact that PhantomJS have struggled with supporting modern web technologies. Throughout the years, maintaining PhantomJS support in Grafana has been a nightmare. Removing support for PhantomJS has been a high priority for the Grafana project and got stressed even more when the PhantomJS maintainer in March 2018 [announced](https://github.com/ariya/phantomjs/issues/15344) the end of the project.
```

Reviewer 3: This is not necessary. We don't need to to go on about how hard it was or the history.

We removed PhantomJS. We replaced it with this. Here are the changes.

Since then we have been working towards removing PhantomJS. In October 2019, when Grafana v6.4 was released, we [announced](https://grafana.com/blog/2019/10/02/grafana-v6.4-released/#phantomjs-deprecation) the deprecation of PhantomJS. Grafana v7.0 removes all PhantomJS support which means that Grafana distribution no longer will include a built-in image renderer.

As a replacement for PhantomJS we’ve developed the [Grafana Image Renderer plugin](https://grafana.com/grafana/plugins/grafana-image-renderer) which is a plugin that runs on the backend and handles rendering panels and dashboards as PNG images using headless Chromium/Chrome. The [Grafana Image Renderer plugin](https://grafana.com/grafana/plugins/grafana-image-renderer) can either be installed as a Grafana plugin running in its own process side-by-side with Grafana. or run as an external HTTP service, hosted using Docker or as a standalone application.

Read more about [Image Rendering]({{< relref "../administration/image_rendering/" >}}) in the documentation for further instructions.

> ## Query History in Explore out of beta

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Query history in Explore out of beta
```

> The Query history feature lets you view and interact with the queries that you have previously run in Explore. You can add queries to the Explore query editor, write comments, create and share URL links, star your favorite queries, and much more. Starred queries are displayed in Starred tab, so it is easier to reuse queries that you run often without typing them from scratch.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The Query history feature lets you view and interact with the queries that you have previously run in Explore. You can add queries to the Explore query editor, write comments, create and share URL links, star your favorite queries, and much more. Starred queries are displayed in the Starred tab, so it is easier to reuse queries that you run often without typing them from scratch.
```

It was released as a beta feature in Grafana 6.7. The feedback has been really positive and it is now out of beta for the 7.0 release. Learn more about query history in [Explore]({{< relref "../features/explore" >}}).

## Stackdriver data source supports Service Monitoring

[Service monitoring](https://cloud.google.com/service-monitoring) in Google Cloud Platform (GCP) enables you to monitor based on Service Level Objectives (SLOs) for your GCP services. The new SLO query builder in the Stackdriver data source allows you to display SLO data in Grafana. Read more about it in the [Stackdriver data source documentation]({{< relref "../features/datasources/stackdriver/#slo-service-level-objective-queries" >}}).

## Time zone support

> Adding support for changing the time zone for a dashboard is one of our oldest feature requests and now in Grafana 7.0, it is finally implemented. You now have the ability to override the time zone used to display date and time values in a dashboard. One of the benefits with this is that you can specify the local time zone of the service/system that you are monitoring which can be really helpful when monitoring a system/service that operates across several time zones.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
 You can now override the time zone used to display date and time values in a dashboard. One benefit ofthis is that you can specify the local time zone of the service or system that you are monitoring which can be helpful when monitoring a system or service that operates across several time zones.
```

> ### Grafana Enterprise

Reviewer 3: Why is this an H3? It does not seem like it is part of time zone support. Maybe change to H2 and have the Enterprise feature headings be h3.

Author: Totally right - will fix.

Author: Done

Reviewer 3: Wait, we only have one Enterprise feature? Then how about

Grafana Enterprise: Usage analytics and presence

Grafana Enterprise focuses on solving problems for large companies and Grafana installations. And in Grafana 7.0 we are finally
solving one of the most common problems of using Grafana at scale.

This includes problems like:

- There are too many dashboards, how do I find the right one?
- How to find popular dashboards
- How to find dashboards with errors
- How to identify dashboards that are not being used
- Who created or last viewed this dashboard?

{{< docs-imagebox img="/img/docs/v70/dashboard_insights_users.png" max-width="1024px" caption="Dashboard Insights Users" >}}

## Usage analytics and presence

> In Grafana 7.0 we are introducing a series of features that build on our new usage analytics engine. Features like improved dashboard search to sort dashboards by usage and errors. When a user opens a dashboard, they will see a presence indicator of who else is viewing the same dashboard. And finally open a dashboard usage stats drawer to view recent dashboard usage.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This release includes a series of features that build on our new usage analytics engine. Features like improved dashboard search to sort dashboards by usage and errors. When a user opens a dashboard, they will see a presence indicator of who else is viewing the same dashboard. And finally open a dashboard usage stats drawer to view recent dashboard usage.
```

Reviewer 3: We really need to rewrite this paragraph as a bulleted list.
